### Jublog Update
Good news everyone, I finally found some time to update the software that runs this blog! It's still written in JavaScript, but this time said JavaScript runs on the server instead of the client. This means that the blog content is served as a static HTML site instead of being generated on the fly, which also means that less data has to be pulled of the server which not only reduces the used bandwith but also speeds up the time it takes to load the page. It also enables Google and other web crawlers to index the site properly since they usually tend to ignore client side JavaScript.

Sooo, how does the blog work now? Well, like I said, it's still JavaScript running here. only this time inside of a Node.js server. Articles are still written in Markdown, but this time stored inside of a MySQL database. Instead of a normal admin interface, the new blog uses a git repository as backend with post-receive hooks to fetch new articles once they are published. If you are interested in the raw data that feeds this blog, the repository is public on [GitHub](https://github.com/JustSid/Blog).

There is some stuff that still needs to be done, for example there is no searching and no RSS feed, and the code, quite honestly, is a mess. But I intend to clean the mess up and add some more features to the blog, and once this is done, I'll publish the source code on GitHub under the MIT license (not that the code would be useful to anyone, but hey, Open Source for the win!).

### Firedrake Update
Well, tinkering with my blog isn't the only thing I've been up to in the last couple of months, I've also been working on Firedrake a bit. Most importantely on the dynamic link-editor which is now able to load, link and relocate most of the ELF dynamic libraries you throw at it. Apart from the dynamic link-editor I've also been working on the driver interface, however, that is currently a huge mess and I have no idea how to clean it. The most annyoing problem is that it's almost impossible to provide a generic interface which can be used by drivers for all sorts of hardware, for example PCI and USB work totally different… and let's not even talk about disk and network drivers. However, I hope to find a solution for that problem in the future.