Almost exactly 4 months after the 0.2.1 release and exactly one year after I started working on Firedrake, I can finally present you [Firedrake 0.3.0](https://github.com/JustSid/Firedrake/commits/release-0.3.0), nicknamed Jormungand. It's a huge update, there have been over 70 commits and the code size increased from 5131 to 15310 lines (actual code, excluding blank lines and comments)! Almost nothing has been left untouched and I did a lot of refactoring of old code which makes Firedrake much faster and more stable than the previous versions. I've already talked about [some of the changes](http://widerwille.com/blog/articles/2012-10-24-firedrake-0-3) in Firedrake 0.3.0, so I won't talk about them again and instead talk a bit about some of the other stuff that made it into this release.

## libio
Wait, I already talked about libio, didn't I? Yes, but it got some massive changes which I want to talk about. The first one is that libio got split up into two libraries; libkernel and libio. libkernel is a lower level C interface which doesn't add as much abstraction as libio does, but instead focuses on exporting raw kernel functionality and providing a thin layer over a few things. libio sits on top of libkernel and provides a wide range of functionality and abstractions to make driver development easier. There is a bit of [documentation](http://widerwille.com/firedrake/docs/latest/libio/) available for libio, which I'm going to heavily extend in the near future. Besides of that, if you are interested in playing around with libio, you should seriously take a look into `/libkernel/libPCI` and `/libkernel/libRTL8139`, which I used to test most of libios functionality (and which provide some insight into how it's supposed to work).

Thanks to the dynamic nature of libio (there is a shadow class for every libio class, which allows for dynamic class lookup and instantiation), it's now also possible for services (the backbone controller classes that provide the actual driver functionality) to find other services which match a set of certain characteristics and publish them at runtime. To give a more concrete explanation of this; The libPCI library consists out of two classes, `PCIProvider` and `PCIDevice`. The `PCIProvider` class scans the bus for available PCI devices and then creates a new `PCIDevice` instance for each found device. `PCIDevice` provides some basic abstraction for the actual PCI device and asks the libio runtime for a matching service for that particular device (the characteristics to match are the vendor id, device id, class and subclass of the PCI device). If a service is found, it will be instantiated and published by the `PCIDevice`, and the service becomes the controller of the device. An example for this is the `RTL8139Controller` class inside libRTL8139, which provides a service that matches the Realtek 8139 ethernet controller.

I'm planning to publish a more in depth post about libio, libkernel and ioglue (the in-kernel dynamic link editor), alongside with documentation and reference guides for various concepts of the driver interface.

## Memory Management
Firedrake now provides two new ways to work with memory, the first one is an abstraction for DMA (`/sys/memory/dma.c|h`) which is also exported into libkernel and libio (via the `IODMARequest` class). It provides a simple way to request pages of memory, and also allows for non contiguous physical memory pages. It will try to use as less fragments as possible (unless you explicitly tell it to use contiguous memory pages, in which case it won't fragment the memory at all), and will then map all fragments as one contiguous block into the virtual memory. Not much else to say here, simple and straight forward.

The second new thing isn't actually "new" but a rewrite of an existing feature: Heaps. Heaps are much more sophisticated now! A heap now works with zones as memory backend for allocations, each zone can serve memory for one class of allocation, where the class is dependent on the size of the allocation. This allows the heap the group likewise sized allocations together and waste less memory on tiny allocations (which make up the majority of allocations inside the kernel). Heaps can also grow indefinitely now (until you run out of actual memory), because they simply add a new zone if they can't find one that can serve the requested allocation (likewise, unused zones get purged and their memory can be reused).


## Firedrake 0.3.x and 0.4.0
If you look into the [commit history](https://github.com/JustSid/Firedrake/network) for Firedrake 0.3.0, you will see that the number of commits increased significantly. Instead of creating one large commit for most of the changes, and working on this one commit for a long time, I created lots of small commits for Firedrake 0.3.0 and pushed them regularly. I intend to keep it this way in the future, and I also want to keep the way branches are organized right now. This means that the Firedrake 0.4.0 development will happen in the `unstable` branch, while patches for 0.3.x will be developed on a new branch called `development` (the `master` branch will be merged from time to time with the `development` branch, once the changes in there are stable enough).

As implied, I intend to develop Firedrake 0.4.0 alongside of 0.3.x. While 0.3.x will contain only patches and no new features, Firedrake 0.4.0 is going to see some major new additions like a virtual file system layer, a userspace dynamic linker as well as a partial standard C library implementation for the userspace. However, these changes are going to be split up into multiple point releases, so there won't be one big 0.4.0 release but multiple small 0.4.x releases with one larger feature per release.