I finally found some time to wrap up the Firedrake 0.2.0, nicknamed Sunrise Jade, release and push it to the public GitHub repository. There has been a crazy lot of changes, 5,242 additions and 1,206 deletions in 103 files (almost no file was unchanged!), and this blogpost is going to be an in-depth review of most of them. Just in case you are interested, the lines of code of just the kernel is now 6117, not counting empty lines.

If you haven't seen it yet, all Firedrake code is now available on GitHub, of course still under the MIT license, so feel free to visit the [repository](https://github.com/JustSid/Firedrake "Link to the Firedrake GitHub repository") and clone, fork and break it! I will also accept pull request.

Also, I would like to change how the development is done, up until now I always made a huge number of changes and then pushed them at once to make sure that the pushed stuff builds cleanly and works stable (okay, stable is a strange word when you speak about an in-development Kernel, but you get the idea…). This is still going to be the case for the master branch, however, I plan to add a `unstable` branch which will receive code changes much more often, but might not build at all or include some unclean stuff.
So much for the introduction, lets dive straight into the changes…

## Memory
The memory management has changed. A lot. Most changes were made in the virtual memory system though, the physical memory manager has only been touched a bit. Firedrake supported virtual memory since its first release, but so far it only supported it for one address space, the one of the kernel, which is a bit unusual and not that useful. Now with Firedrake 0.2.0, this has changed, there is one 4gb virtual address space for the kernel which includes every little bit of the kernel, and then there is one 4gb address space per process, meaning that the each program can use the whole address space just for itself. How exactly this works out is described a bit later, but for now just assume that it does work.

So, the virtual memory manager is now able to craft new and empty page directories, keep in mind though that those are passed as physical addresses only! This means that before you can access any page directorys memory, you first have to map it into the memory of the currently active address space, which for the most parts is going to be the kernels address space. Afterwards you also have to map each page table into memory, which was a cause for a lot of bugs in the previous release which often just assumed that the memory was already mapped. These bugs are now fixed, the virtual memory manager correctly creates temporary mappings before accessing potentially unmapped memory.

Together with those fixes came a few additions, for example all mapping related functions now take an extra argument for an lower limit, which makes sure that the mapping doesn't happen at an address lower than the limit. This is especially useful for things like stacks which are expected to be at an high address, but its also used in a hacky way for the kernels new `mmap()` implementation. There are also some other useful additions, for example like the addition of two sided vm_alloc function which allows to allocate pages in both the kernels page directory and an arbitrary other page directory, the functions makes sure that the returned address is the same for both page directores which is useful for things like the kernel stack which must be visible at the same address in both the kernels address space and the users address space.

Last but not least, there is also a new way to allocate memory in the kernel itself. Previously it was only possible to allocate memory in 4k chunks via the kalloc() function, this is now history. There is a new heap based memory allocator which allocates a larger chunk of memory at once and then allocates smaller chunks inside of it when requested. This way, no space is wasted if you only need space for a few bytes. You can create arbitrary heaps, but currently there is only one created with 10mb. Allocations can be done via the new `halloc()` and `hrealloc()` functions, which work essentially the same as `malloc()` and `realloc()`, but take an additional argument for the heap to use (if you pass NULL, the kernels default heap is used).

## Interrupts
Lets talk about interrupts, they are essential for any kernel to work properly and have been completely rewritten in this release. The reason for this is simple, whenever an interrupt occurs, be it through hardware or software, the CPU automatically switches control over to the kernel to handle it. This introduces some problems in Firedrake, because every process has its own 4gb address space and the kernels code is not visible in it, so if there was an interrupt and the CPU would jump to the interrupt handler which of course isn't mapped into the currently active address space which would force the CPU to rise an page fault, which is also handled by the interrupt handler, which results in another page fault which makes the CPU to simply give up and halt. Not exactly the desired behavior, so Firedrake uses a trampoline area which only purpose it is to switch to the kernels address space and then call the high level kernel interrupt handler. This small area, which only consists out of 2 pages, is mapped into each and every page directory at the very same address; `0xFFAFF000`.

The trampoline area includes the new interrupt entry points, so if an interrupt occurs, the CPU can jump to the trampoline area and start executing there. The entry points than make sure that the needed state information are pushed on the stack, this includes the eight general purpose registers and the four segment registers plus the information that the CPU pushes automatically (EFLAGS, EIP, ESP, cs and ss registers). Then the handler loads the kernels segment registers and finally loads the kernels address space before handing control over to the kernels high level interrupt handler. Afterwards the same process is reversed and the address space is switched to the one of the currently scheduled process. All this stuff is implemented inside `Kernel/interrupts/idt.S`, so feel free to take a look.

Of course there is a reason why this isn't done in all kernels (although there are a few), normally the virtual address space of a process is split 3:1 or similar, and the kernel is mapped into the upper half, which is useful because this trampoline stuff doesn't have to be implemented and the address space doesn't have to be switched for every interrupt. Switching the address space is kinda expensive, because it trashes the TLB of the MMU which in return means that every memory access after such a switch hits a cold cache (and in the worst case the MMU has to make up to 24 memory accesses to resolve the linear address). However, Firedrake is not a professional kernel, so those minor performance hits are completly acceptable. Besides, even kernels like XNU (used by Mac OS X and Darwin) use things like this (only the 32bit kernel though, the newer 64bit kernel uses the more convinient approach).

Another thing probably worth mentioning is that the kernel now first initializes the memory manager before creating anything needed for interrupts to work, because they now need access to the virtual memory system to have it map the trampoline area. So if you change the init routine of either of the three memory managers (physical, virtual or heap), keep in mind that interrupts are delivered later and if something really goes bad the CPU might even halt completly and refuse to do its job. This can be tricky do debug, so make sure you know what you are doing!


## Syscalls
With the new interrupt handler and the new virtual memory stuff comes a new syscall handler. Previously it was really easy to handle syscalls because everything was in one address space and every memory bit could be accessed without any problems. Now, the syscall entry point has to do some extra steps before it can call the actual handler of the syscall, for example it has to map the stack of the process temporaly into memory so that the kernel can access the arguments that were pushed (and most syscall handlers expect some arguments). Also implemented now is `errno`, which is passed through the ecx register to the process.

However, if you implement a syscall handler, chances are that you also need to map some memory around, for example the print syscall handler gets passed a pointer to a string that should be print and of course this pointer is inside the process' address space. So it first hast to resolve the address into the physcial address and then map the chunk of memory into the kernel before it can access it. And of course at the end the mapping should be reversed because otherwise the kernels virtual address space fills up pretty fast.

## Debugging
Up until now, the only way to debug Firedrake was through syslog(). That works for small things, but it doesn't for various other problems, and in the case of exceptions and a kernel panic up until now you had to either use an emulator to know what caused the exception or throw in some random syslog() calls in the hope you could track it down this way. This has changed, if Firedrake comes down now, it prints a nice callstack along witht he panic message, which lists the calls that were made inside the kernel which lead to the problem. This becomes really useful if you have to debug a problem in the kernel itself (otherwise you might only see that the kernel was entered through the interrupt handler, but nothing before because that happened in another process), however, there is one thing you need to keep in mind if you are watching a backtrace; If there is any interrupt that lead to the crash, the callstack is not 100% accurate. This is, because the function that actually caused the interrupt is *not* visible in the callstack!
Keep that in mind when debugging by using the callstack which is automatically dumped when there is a kernel panic.

Another way to debug memory problems are hardware watchpoints. The x86 architecture allows you to define up to four watchpoints for any linear address, you can set some conditions for the watchpoint as well, for example "it must be a read access and happen anywhere from the address to the address + 4 bytes". Whenever the condition is met, the CPU will call the interrupt handler which will dump the current callstack and then resume operation. Look into `Kernel/system/kernel.h` to see how this stuff works and what conditions you can set. However, there is a small caveat when using this; Local watchpoints. A local watchpoint is automatically disabled once an interrupt handler is called, but not reenabled when it left. In theory you should be able to set a few watchpoints per process and have Firedrake enable them as local watchpoints for you when the process gets scheduled so that you can track memory bugs for one process. This however, is not yet implemented, so you should always use a global watchpoint and keep that in mind.

## Whats next?
So, this covers the four really big topics I wanted to cover, of course there are many more things that changed, for example that the kernel is able to load ELF binaries now or that it can run unit tests. However, I won't go into any greater detail about them right now, because they aren't that important or just so small that its not worth to mention them. Feel free to read the [changelog](http://widerwille.com/firedrake/changelog.html) instead which lists far more changes and additions, although not in a great detail (and some changes aren't mentioned at all because they are way too minor).

But, whats next for Firedrake? I already said it a few times, I will work on Firedrake as long as I have fun doing this, without any greater goal but just implement more and more stuff. And I still have fun doing this, so here is what I have planned for the near future, in no order; A driver interface (which was originally planned for this release), a dynamic linker (which will run in a programs address space, basically like a simple libexec), some kind of shell and much more syscalls so that programs can actually do useful stuff.