If you have visited this website before, you might noticed that it looks drastically different now. The reason is that I threw away the old WordPress powered blogging system and replaced it by something custom called "Jublog". Jublog is a lightweight blogsoftware powered by JavaScript, CSS and HTML. No PHP at all!

The reason why I did this, are actually two reasons. First of all, while I can develop client based apps for iOS and Mac OS X, I never did a more or less serious web app so I always wanted to create one, but I really hate PHP for its clumsy syntax. The second reason is that I listen to [Build and Analyze](http://5by5.tv/buildanalyze "Build and Analyize Podcast") with [Marco Arment](http://marco.org "Marco Arments Blog") and he talked about his dream blogsoftware a while ago and he mentioned that it should definitely be static with lots of JavaScript sugar.
So, a while ago from now (today is the 3rd December 2011), I sat down and began writing my own blogsoftware. The layout is based on the awesome [Twitter Bootstrap](https://github.com/twitter/bootstrap "Twitter Bootstrap on GitHub"), every article is a static text file written in [Markdwon](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax "Markdown syntax") and fetched via Ajax.

When you request an article, either by surfing to a specific site, using a fixed link to an article or by using the tag search, you will receive a template HTML site which contains some basic layout (the top bar) and a div for the content. You also receive some JavaScript that parses the URL and fetches the article info and site info, the site info is used to generate the layout of the site (eg. the sidebar with its content etc) and the article info is used to fetch every article from the server. When a article is received, its markdown is parsed and converted to HTML (I use the excellent [PageDown](http://code.google.com/p/pagedown/ "Pagedown repository") library by the StackExchange guys for this). The converted HTML is then parsed and all image tags are removed and replaced by the thumbnails and an action that opens a popup with the Image when the thumbnail is clicked. Links are also updated to include this nice little Twipsy.

Well thats it, this is essentially how Jublog works. I'm planning to Open Source it in the future, but before I can do this I really need to clean up and document the JavaScript mess that I created.